# GP2040
GP2040, or more accurately [GP2040-CE](https://gp2040-ce.info/), is an open-source firmware for making your own controllers suitable for hooking up to modern systems. While the original versions of the *C64 JoyKEY* used a custom Arduino-based sketch for doing the same thing, but doing so properly takes a little more effort to make things compatible all over the board - at least more than I'm personally able to support while looking at the thing once or twice in a decade. Later versions therefore use GP2040-CE firmware running on a vastly more powerful Raspberry Pi Pico, which also means that it's absolutely overflowing with features. And customizability that would inevitably make every controller unique from the one built by the next person.

My point with all this is that what follows will not work on all of them, but should work on the *C64 JoyKey 2040* as long as you follows the setup exactly. 

### Configure for TheC64:
TheC64 won't work with GP2040 set to *xinput* input mode, but it will work with it set to *Nintendo*. That will however scramble the placement of the keys so we'll start with setting to load the second profile, then the actual input mode is switched by holding a key while plugging it in. Follow the following steps exactly:

- `P1 F1` + `P1 F4` + `RIGHT`
- Disconnect, then hold and keep holding `P1 F6` when plugging in the cable.
  - Mode switches after approximately 20 seconds.

### Configure for TheAmiga or TheSpectrum:
TheAmiga as well as TheSpectrum should be set to *xinput* input mode. Assuming that we're in *TheC64*-mode, you can back to this mode by having GP2040 load the first profile, then the actual input mode is switched by holding a key while plugging it in. Follow the following steps exactly:

- `P1 F1` + `P1 F4` + `LEFT`
- Disconnect, then hold and keep holding `P2 F3` when plugging in the cable.
  - Mode switches after approximately 20 seconds.
